---
description:Create, Host, and Share Data Streams
---

## Ceramic

Ceramic is a decentralized, open source platform for creating, hosting, and sharing streams of data. With Ceramic's permissionless data streaming network, you can store streams of information and ever-changing files directly on the decentralized web – and share updates with anyone in the world.

Ceramic is a public, permissionless, open source protocol that provides computation, state transformations, and consensus for all types of data structures stored on the decentralized web. Ceramic's stream processing enables developers to build secure, trustless, censorship-resistant applications on top of dynamic information without trusted database servers.

Read more in the [docs](https://developers.ceramic.network/learn/welcome/) and on their [webpage](https://ceramic.network/)

Join the [community on Discord](https://discord.com/invite/6VRZpGP) to get connected

#### Ceramic: Building with Soverign Data on Ceramic Network | ETHGlobal – Joel Thorstensson
Join Joel Thorstensson of Ceramic for a workshop titled "Building with Sovereign Data on Ceramic Network," part of HackFS 2021, a three-week virtual hackathon focused on building a digital world

{% embed url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BX49K3BL-U8" %}

## What is Ceramic?
_This is an [annotated version of this blog](https://blog.ceramic.network/what-is-ceramic/)_

Ceramic is a public, permissionless, open source protocol that provides computation, state transformations, and consensus for all types of data structures stored on the decentralized web. Ceramic's stream processing enables developers to build with dynamic information without trusted database servers to create powerful, secure, trustless, censorship-resistant applications.

### The internet of open source information
At its core, the internet is a collection of applications running on stateful data sources – from identity systems and user tables to databases and feeds for storing all kinds of content generated by users, services, or machines.

Most of the information on today's internet is locked away on application-specific database servers designed to protect data as a proprietary resource. Acting as a trusted middleman, applications make it difficult and opaque for others to access this information by requiring explicit permissions, one-off API integrations, and trust that returned state is correct. This siloed and competitive environment results in more friction for developers and worse experiences for users.

Along other dimensions, the web has rapidly evolved into a more open source, composable, and collaborative ecosystem. We can observe this trend in open source software enabled by Git's distributed version control and in open source finance enabled by blockchain's double-spend protection. The same principles of open source have not yet been applied to content.

### Decentralized content computation
Open sourcing the content layer for applications requires deploying information to a public, permissionless environment where files can be stored, computation can be performed, state can be tracked, and others can easily access content.

Advancements in other Web3 protocols have already achieved success in decentralized file storage. As a universal file system for the decentralized web, IPFS (including IPLD and Libp2p) provides an extremely flexible content naming and routing system. As a storage disk, durable persistence networks (such as Filecoin, Arweave, and Sia) ensure that the content represented in IPFS files are persisted and kept available. This stack of Web3 protocols performs well for storing static files, but on its own lacks the computation and state management capacity for more advanced database-like features such as mutability, version control, access control, and programmable logic. These are required to enable developers to build fully-featured decentralized applications.

Ceramic enables static files to be composed into higher-order mutable data structures, programmed to behave in any desired manner, and whose resulting state is stored and replicated across a decentralized network of nodes. Ceramic builds upon and extends the IPFS file system and underlying persistence networks, as well as other open standards in the decentralized ecosystem, with a general-purpose decentralized content computation substrate. Due to Ceramic's permissionless design and unified global network, anyone in the world can openly create, discover, query, and build upon existing data without needing to trust a centralized server, integrate one-off APIs, or worry if the state of information being returned is correct.

### Streams
Ceramic's decentralized content computation network is modeled after various stream processing frameworks found in Web2. In these types of systems, events are ingested, processed as they arrive, and the resulting output is applied to a log. When queried and reduced, this log represents the current state of a piece of information. This is an appropriate framework for conceptualizing how dynamic information should be modeled on the decentralized web. Furthermore because the function that processes incoming events on any particular stream can be custom written with logic for any use case, it provides the general-purpose flexibility and extensibility needed to represent the diversity of information that may exist on the web.

On Ceramic, each piece of information is represented as an append-only log of commits, called a Stream. Each stream is a DAG stored in IPLD, with an immutable name called a StreamID, and a verifiable state called a StreamState. Streams are similar in concept to Git trees, and each stream can be thought of as its own blockchain, ledger, or event log.

### StreamTypes
Each stream must specify a StreamType, which is the processing logic used by the particular stream. A StreamType is essentially a function that is executed by a Ceramic node upon receipt of a new commit to the stream that governs the stream's state transitions and resulting output. StreamTypes are responsible for enforcing all rules and logic for the stream, such as data structure, content format, authentication or access control, and consensus algorithm. If an update does not conform to the logic specified by the StreamType, the update is disregarded. After applying a valid commit to the stream, the resulting StreamState is broadcast out to the rest of the nodes on the Ceramic Network. Each of the other nodes that are also maintaining this stream will update their StreamState to reflect this new transaction.

Ceramic's flexible StreamTypes framework enables developers to deploy any kind of information that conforms to any set of arbitrary rules as a stateful stream of events. Ceramic clients come pre-packaged with a standard set of StreamTypes that cover a wide range of common use cases, making it easy to get started building applications:

### Authentication
StreamTypes are able to specify their authentication requirements for how new data is authorized to be added to a particular stream. Different StreamTypes may choose to implement different authentication requirements. One of the most powerful and important authentication mechanisms that Ceramic StreamTypes support is DIDs, the W3C standard for decentralized identifiers. DIDs are used by the default StreamTypes (Tile Documents and CAIP-10 Links).

DIDs provide a way to go from a globally-unique, platform-agnostic string identifier to a DID document containing public keys for signature verification and encryption. Ceramic is capable of supporting any DID method implementation.

### Ceramic Network
The Ceramic Network is a decentralized, worldwide network of nodes running the Ceramic protocol that communicate over a dedicated topic on the Libp2p peer-to-peer networking protocol. Ceramic is able to achieve maximum horizontal scalability, throughput, and performance due to its unique design.

### Sharded execution environment
Unlike traditional blockchain systems where scalability is limited to a single global virtual execution environment (VM) and the state of a single ledger is shared between all nodes, each Ceramic node acts as an individual execution environment for performing computations and validating transactions on streams – there is no global ledger. This "built-in" execution sharding enables the Ceramic Network to scale horizontally to parallelize the processing of an increasing number of simultaneous stream transactions as the number of nodes on the network increases. Such a design is needed to handle the scale of the world's data, which is orders of magnitude greater than the throughput needed on a financial blockchain. Another benefit of this design is that a Ceramic node can perform stream transactions in an offline-first environment and then later sync updates with the rest of the network when it comes back online.

### Global namespace
Since all nodes are part of the same Ceramic Network, every stream on Ceramic exists within a single global namespace where it can be accessed by any other node or referenced by any other stream. This creates a public data web of open source information.

### Clients
Clients provide standard interfaces for performing transactions and queries on streams, and are installed into applications. Clients are also responsible for authenticating users and signing transactions.

Currently there are three clients for Ceramic. Additional client implementations can easily be developed in other programming languages:

* JS HTTP client: A lightweight JavaScript client which connects to a remote Ceramic node over HTTP. The JS HTTP client is recommended for application developers.
* JS Core client: A JavaScript client which also includes a full Ceramic node. The JS Core client is for those who want the maximum decentralization of running the full Ceramic protocol directly in a browser application.
* CLI: A command line interface for interacting with a Ceramic node.

## Tutorials
* [Quickstart](https://developers.ceramic.network/build/cli/quick-start/) – Learn the basics by setting up and interacting with the [Ceramic CLI](https://developers.ceramic.network/build/cli/installation/). This tutorial serves as a simple introduction to Ceramic concepts.

### Try Ceramic
To experience how Ceramic works in a browser application, try the [Playground app](https://ceramicstudio.github.io/web-playground/).

In addition to various standards referenced throughout this document, the Ceramic community has already begun developing many different open source protocols, tools, and services that simplify the experience of developing on Ceramic:

* 3ID Connect: A authentication SDK for browser-based applications that allows your users to transact with Ceramic using their blockchain wallet.
* IDX: A protocol for decentralized identity that allows a DID to aggregate an index of all their data from across all apps in one place. IDX enables user-centric data storage, discovery, and interoperability. It is effectively a decentralized, cross-platform user table. IDX can reference all data source types, including Ceramic streams and other peer-to-peer databases and files.
* IdentityLink: A service that issues verifiable claims which prove a DID owns various other Web2 social accounts such as Twitter, Github, Discord, Discourse, Telegram, Instagram, etc. Once issued, claims are stored in the DID's IDX.
* Tiles: An explorer for the Ceramic Network.
* Documint: A browser-based IDE for creating and editing streams.
